



Homenet                                                       D. Migault
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Intended status: Experimental                                   R. Weber
Expires: 20 July 2023                                            Nominum
                                                           M. Richardson
                                                Sandelman Software Works
                                                               R. Hunter
                                                    Globis Consulting BV
                                                         16 January 2023


      Simple Provisioning of Public Names for Residential Networks
           draft-ietf-homenet-front-end-naming-delegation-26

Abstract

   Home network owners may have devices or services hosted on their home
   network that they wish to access from the Internet (i.e., from a
   network outside of the home network).  Home networks are increasingly
   numbered using IPv6 addresses, which in principle makes this access
   simpler, but their access from the Internet requires the names and IP
   addresses of these devices and services to be made available in the
   public DNS.

   This document describes how an Home Naming Authority (NHA) instructs
   the outsourced infrastructure to publish these pieces of information
   in the public DNS.  The names and IP addresses of the home network
   are set in the Public Homenet Zone by the Homenet Naming Authority
   (HNA), which in turn instructs an outsourced infrastructure to
   publish the zone on behalf of the home network owner.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 20 July 2023.




Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2023 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   3.  Selecting Names and Addresses to Publish  . . . . . . . . . .   7
   4.  Envisioned deployment scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.1.  CPE Vendor  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.2.  Agnostic CPE  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   5.  Architecture Description  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     5.1.  Architecture Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     5.2.  Distribution Manager (DM) Communication Channels  . . . .  12
   6.  Control Channel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     6.1.  Information to Build the Public Homenet Zone  . . . . . .  14
     6.2.  Information to build the DNSSEC chain of trust  . . . . .  15
     6.3.  Information to set up the Synchronization Channel . . . .  15
     6.4.  Deleting the delegation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     6.5.  Messages Exchange Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
       6.5.1.  Retrieving information for the Public Homenet Zone  .  16
       6.5.2.  Providing information for the DNSSEC chain of
               trust . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
       6.5.3.  Providing information for the Synchronization
               Channel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
       6.5.4.  HNA instructing deleting the delegation . . . . . . .  19
     6.6.  Securing the Control Channel  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   7.  Synchronization Channel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
     7.1.  Securing the Synchronization Channel  . . . . . . . . . .  21
   8.  DM Distribution Channel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   9.  HNA Security Policies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   10. Public Homenet Reverse Zone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
   11. DNSSEC compliant Homenet Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
   12. Renumbering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
   13. Privacy Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  26
   14. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
     14.1.  Registered Homenet Domain  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28



Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


     14.2.  HNA DM channels  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
     14.3.  Names are less secure than IP addresses  . . . . . . . .  29
     14.4.  Names are less volatile than IP addresses  . . . . . . .  30
     14.5.  Deployment Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  30
     14.6.  Operational Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  30
   15. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
   16. Acknowledgment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
   17. Contributors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
   18. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
     18.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
     18.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  33
   Appendix A.  HNA Channel Configurations . . . . . . . . . . . . .  37
     A.1.  Homenet Public Zone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  37
   Appendix B.  Information Model for Outsourced information . . . .  38
   Appendix C.  Example: A manufacturer provisioned HNA product
           flow  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  41
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  42

1.  Introduction

   Home network owners may have devices or services hosted on their home
   network that they wish to access from the Internet (i.e., from a
   network outside of the home network).  The use of IPv6 addresesses in
   the home makes in principle the actual network access simpler, while
   on the other hand, the addresses are much harder to remember, and
   subject to regular renumbering.  To make this situation simpler for
   typical home owners to manage, there needs to be an easy way for
   names and IP addresses of these devices and services to be published
   in the public DNS.

   As depicted in {fig-outsourcing-overview}, he names and IP address of
   the home network are made availble in the Public Homenet Zone by the
   Homenet Naming Authority (HNA), which in turn instructs the DNS
   Outsourcing Infrastructure (DOI) to publish the zone on behalf of the
   HNA.  This document describes how an HNA can instruct a DOI to
   publish a Public Homenet Zone on its behalf.

   The document introduces the Synchronization Channel and the Control
   Channel between the HNA and the Distribution Manager (DM), which is
   the main interface to the DNS Outsourcing Infrastructure (DOI).

   The Synchronization Channel (see Section 7) is used to synchronize
   the Public Homenet Zone.








Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


                                        Internet
         .---------------------.           .-------------------.
         |      Home Network   | Control   |        DOI        |
         |.-------------------.| Channel   |.-----------------.|
         ||         HNA       |<----------->|  Distribution   ||
         ||.-----------------.||           ||  Manager        ||
         |||  Public Homenet |||           ||                 ||
         |||       Zone      ||<----------->|                 ||
         ||| myhome.example  ||| Synchron- |'-----------------'|
         ||'-----------------'|| ization   |         |         |
         |'-------------------'| Channel   |         V         |
         |                     |           |.-----------------.|
         |                     |           ||  Public Homenet ||
         '---------------------'           ||       Zone      ||
                                           || myhome.example  ||
                                           |'-----------------'|
                                           '---^--^--^--^--^---'
                                               |  |  |  |  |
                                          (served on the Internet)

       Figure 1: High level architecture overview of outsourcing the
                            Public Homenet Zone

   The Synchronization Channel is a zone transfer, with the HNA
   configured as a primary, and the Distribution Manager configured as a
   secondary.  Some operators refer to this kind of configuration as a
   "hidden primary", but that term is not used in this document as it is
   not precisely defined anywhere, but has many slightly different
   meanings to many.

   The Control Channel (see Section 6) is used to set up the
   Synchronization Channel.  This channel is in the form of a dynamic
   DNS update process, authenticated by TLS.

   For example, to build the Public Homenet Zone, the HNA needs the
   authoritative servers (and associated IP addresses) of the servers
   (the visible primaries) of the DOI actually serving the zone.
   Similarly, the DOI needs to know the IP address of the (hidden)
   primary (HNA) as well as potentially the hash of the Key Signing Key
   (KSK) in the DS RRset to secure the DNSSEC delegation with the parent
   zone.

   The remainder of the document is as follows.

   Section 2 defines the terminology.  Section 3 presents the general
   problem of publishing names and IP addresses.





Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   Section 5 provides an architectural view of the HNA, DM and DOI as
   well as their different communication channels (Control Channel,
   Synchronization Channel, DM Distribution Channel) respectively
   described in Section 6, Section 7 and Section 8.

   Then Section 6 and Section 7 deal with the two channels that
   interface to the home.  Section 8 provides a set of requirements and
   expectations on how the distribution system works.  This section is
   non-normative and not subject to standardization, but reflects how
   many scalable DNS distribution systems operate.

   Section 9 and Section 11 respectively detail HNA security policies as
   well as DNSSEC compliance within the home network.

   Section 12 discusses how renumbering should be handled.

   Finally, Section 13 and Section 14 respectively discuss privacy and
   security considerations when outsourcing the Public Homenet Zone.

   The appendices discuss several management (see Section 10)
   provisioning (see Section 10), configurations (see Appendix B) and
   deployment (see Section 4 and Appendix C) aspects.

2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   Customer Premises Equipment:  (CPE) is a router providing
      connectivity to the home network.

   Homenet Zone:  is the DNS zone for use within the boundaries of the
      home network: 'home.arpa' (see [RFC8375]).  This zone is not
      considered public and is out of scope for this document.

   Registered Homenet Domain:  is the domain name that is associated
      with the home network.  A given home network may have multiple
      Registered Homenet Domain.

   Public Homenet Zone:  contains the names in the home network that are
      expected to be publicly resolvable on the Internet.  A home
      network can have multiple Public Homenet Zones.

   Homenet Naming Authority(HNA):  is a function responsible for




Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


      managing the Public Homenet Zone.  This includes populating the
      Public Homenet Zone, signing the zone for DNSSEC, as well as
      managing the distribution of that Homenet Zone to the DNS
      Outsourcing Infrastructure (DOI).

   DNS Outsourcing Infrastructure (DOI):  is the infrastructure
      responsible for receiving the Public Homenet Zone and publishing
      it on the Internet.  It is mainly composed of a Distribution
      Manager and Public Authoritative Servers.

   Public Authoritative Servers:  are the authoritative name servers for
      the Public Homenet Zone.  Name resolution requests for the
      Registered Homenet Domain are sent to these servers.  Some DNS
      operators would refer to these as public secondaries, and for
      higher resiliency networks, are often implemented in an anycast
      fashion.

   Homenet Authoritative Servers:  are authoritative name servers for
      the Homenet Zone within the Homenet network itself.  These are
      sometimes called the hidden primary servers.

   Distribution Manager (DM):  is the (set of) server(s) to which the
      HNA synchronizes the Public Homenet Zone, and which then
      distributes the relevant information to the Public Authoritative
      Servers.  This server has been historically known as the
      Distribution Master.

   Public Homenet Reverse Zone:  The reverse zone file associated with
      the Public Homenet Zone.

   Reverse Public Authoritative Servers:  equivalent to Public
      Authoritative Servers specifically for reverse resolution.

   Reverse Distribution Manager:  equivalent to Distribution Manager
      specifically for reverse resolution.

   Homenet DNS(SEC) Resolver:  a resolver that performs a DNS(SEC)
      resolution on the home network for the Public Homenet Zone.  The
      resolution is performed requesting the Homenet Authoritative
      Servers.

   DNS(SEC) Resolver:  a resolver that performs a DNS resolution on the
      Internet for the Public Homenet Zone.  The resolution is performed
      requesting the Public Authoritative Servers.







Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


3.  Selecting Names and Addresses to Publish

   While this document does not create any normative mechanism to select
   the names to publish, this document anticipates that the home network
   administrator (a human being), will be presented with a list of
   current names and addresses either directly on the HNA or via another
   device such as a smartphone.

   The administrator would mark which devices and services (by name),
   are to be published.  The HNA would then collect the IP address(es)
   associated with that device or service, and put the name into the
   Public Homenet Zone.  The address of the device or service can be
   collected from a number of places: mDNS [RFC6762], DHCP [RFC8415],
   UPnP, PCP [RFC6887], or manual configuration.

   A device or service SHOULD have Global Unicast Addresses (GUA) (IPv6
   [RFC3787] or IPv4), but MAY also have Unique Local IPv6 Addresses
   (ULA) [RFC4193], IPv6-Link-Local addresses[RFC4291][RFC7404], IPv4-
   Link-Local Addresses [RFC3927] (LLA), and finally, private IPv4
   addresses [RFC1918].

   Of these the link-local are almost never useful for the Public Zone,
   and should be omitted.

   The IPv6 ULA and the private IPv4 addresses may be useful to publish,
   if the home network environment features a VPN that would allow the
   home owner to reach the network.  RFC1918 addresses in public zones
   are generally filtered out by many DNS servers as they are considered
   rebind attacks [REBIND].

   In general, one expects the GUA to be the default address to be
   published.  A direct advantage of enabling local communication is to
   enable communications even in case of Internet disruption.
   Since communications are established with names which remain a global
   identifier, the communication can be protected (at the very least
   with integrity protection) by TLS the same way it is protected on the
   global Internet - using certificates.  

4.  Envisioned deployment scenarios

   A number of deployment scenarios have been envisioned, this section
   aims at providing a brief description.  The use cases are not
   limitations and this section is not normative.








Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   The main difference between the various deployments concerns the
   provisioning of the HNA - that is how it is configured to outsource
   the Public Homenet Zone to the DOI - as well as how the Public
   Homenet Zone is being provisioned before being outsourced.
   In both cases, these configuration aspects are out of the scope of
   the document.

   Provisioning the configuration related to the DOI is expected to be
   automated as much as possible and require as little as possible
   interaction with the end user.
   Zero configuration can only be achieved under some circumstances and
   [I-D.ietf-homenet-naming-architecture-dhc-options] provides one such
   example under the assumption the ISP provides the DOI.  Section 4.1
   describes another variant where the CPE is provided preconfigured
   with the DOI.  Section 4.2 describes how an agnostic CPE may be
   configured by the home network administrator.  Of course even in this
   case, the configuration can leverage mechanisms to prevent the end
   user manually entering all information.

   On the other hand, provisioning the Public Homenet Zone needs to
   combine the ability to closely reflect what the end user wishes to
   publish on the Internet while easing such interaction.  The HNA may
   implement such interactions using Web GUI or specific mobile
   applications.

   With the CPE configured with the DOI, the HNA contacts the DOI to
   build a template for the Public Homenet Zone, and then provision the
   Public Homenet Zone.  Once the Public Homenet Zone is built, the HNA
   strats synchronizing it with the DOI on the Synchronization channel.

4.1.  CPE Vendor

   A specific vendor with specific relations with a registrar or a
   registry may sell a CPE that is provisioned with a domain name.  Such
   a domain name is probably not human friendly, and may consist of some
   kind of serial number associated with the device being sold.

   One possible scenario is that the vendor provisions the HNA with a
   private key, with an associated certificate used for the mutual TLS
   authentication.  Note that these keys are not expected to be used for
   DNSSEC signing.

   Instead these keys are solely used by the HNA for the authentication
   to the DM.  Normally the keys should be necessary and sufficient to
   proceed to the authentication.

   When the home network owner plugs in the CPE at home, the relation
   between HNA and DM is expected to work out-of-the-box.



Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


4.2.  Agnostic CPE

   A CPE that is not preconfigured may also use the protocol defined in
   this document but some configuration steps will be needed.

   1.  The owner of the home network buys a domain name from a
       registrar, and as such creates an account on that registrar

   2.  the registrar may also be providing the outsourcing
       infrastructure or the home network may need to create a specific
       account on the outsourcing infrastructure.

   *  If the DOI is the DNS Registrar, it has by design a proof of
      ownership of the domain name by the homenet owner.  In this case,
      it is expected the DOI provides the necessary parameters to the
      home network owner to configure the HNA.  One potential mechanism
      to provide the parameters would be to provide the user with a JSON
      object which they can copy paste into the CPE - such as described
      in Appendix B.  But, what matters to infrastructure is that the
      HNA is able to authenticate itself to the DOI.

   *  If the DOI is not the DNS Registrar, then the proof of ownership
      needs to be established using some other protocol.  ACME [RFC8555]
      is one protocol that would allow an owner of an existing domain
      name to prove their ownership (but requires they have DNS already
      setup!)  There are other ways such as putting a DOI generated TXT
      record, or web site contents, as championed by entities like
      Google's Sitemaster and Postmaster protocols.
      [I-D.ietf-dnsop-domain-verification-techniques] describes a few
      ways ownership or control of a domain can be achieved.

5.  Architecture Description

   This section provides an overview of the architecture for outsourcing
   the authoritative naming service from the HNA to the DOI.  As a
   consequence, this prevents HNA to handle the DNS traffic from the
   Internet associated with the resolution of the Homenet Zone.

   The device assigned zone or user configurable zone to use as the
   domain to publicly serve hostnames in the home network is called the
   Public Homenet Zone.  In this document, "myhome.example" is used as
   the example for an enduser owned domain configured as Public Homenet
   Zone.

   More specifically, DNS resolution for the Public Homenet Zone (here
   myhome.example) from Internet DNSSEC resolvers is handled by the DOI
   as opposed to the HNA.  The DOI benefits from a cloud infrastructure
   while the HNA is dimensioned for home network and as such likely



Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   unable to support any load.  In the case the HNA is a CPE,
   outsourcing to the DOI protects the home network against DDoS for
   example.  Of course the DOI needs to be informed dynamically about
   the content of myhome.example.  The description of such a
   synchronization mechanism is the purpose of this document.

   Note that Appendix B shows necessary parameters to configure the HNA.

5.1.  Architecture Overview

  .----------------------------.         .-----------------------------.
  |        Home Network        |         |          Internet           |
  | .-----------------------.  | Control |  .-----------------------.  |
  | |          HNA          |  | Channel |  |          DOI          |  |
  | |   (hidden primary)    |<------------->|   (hidden secondary)  |  |
  | |                       |  | DNSUPD  |  |  Distribution Manager |  |
  | | .-------------------. |  |         |  |                       |  |
  | | |  Public Homenet   | |  |         |  |  .-------------------.|  |
  | | |       Zone        |<------------------>| Public Homenet Zo ||  |
  | | | myhome.example    | |  |Synchron-|  |  | myhome.example    ||  |
  | | '-------------------' |  | ization |  |  '-------------------'|  |
  | '-----------------------'  |Channel  |  |             |         |  |
  |             ^              |  AXFR   |  |             |         |  |
  |             |              |         |  |             v         |  |
  | .-----------------------.  |         |  |.---------------------.|  |
  | | Homenet Authoritative |  |         |  || Public Authoriative ||  |
  | |        Server         |  |         |  || (secondary) Servers ||  |
  | | + myhome.example      |  |         |  || + myhome.example    ||  |
  | | + home.arpa           |  |         |  || + x.y.z.ip6.arpa    ||  |
  | | + x.y.z.ip6.arpa      |  |         |  ||                     ||  |
  | '-----------------------'  |         |  ||                     ||  |
  |        |       ^           |         |  |'---------------------'|  |
  |        |       |           |         |  |  ^            |       |  |
  |        |       |           |         |  '--|------------|-------'  |
  |        v       |           |         |     |            v          |
  |  .----------------------.  |         | .------------------------.  |
  |  |   Homenet Resolver   |  |         | |   Internet Resolvers   |  |
  |  '----------------------'  |         | '------------------------'  |
  |                            |         |                             |
  '----------------------------'         |                             |
                                         '-----------------------------'

                  Figure 2: Homenet Naming Architecture








Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   Figure 2 illustrates the architecture where the HNA outsources the
   publication of the Public Homenet Zone to the DOI.  The DOI will
   serve every DNS request of the Public Homenet Zone coming from
   outside the home network.  When the request is coming within the home
   network, the resolution is expected to be handled by the Homenet
   Resolver as detailed in further details below.

   In this example, The Public Homenet Zone is identified by the
   Registered Homenet Domain name -- myhome.example.  This diagram also
   shows a reverse IPv6 map being hosted.

   The ".local" as well as ".home.arpa" are explicitly not considered as
   Public Homenet zones and represented as a Homenet Zone in Figure 2.
   They are resolved locally, but not published as they are local
   content.

   It is RECOMMENDED the HNA implements DNSSEC, in which case the HNA
   MUST signs the Public Homenet Zone with DNSSEC.

   The HNA handles all operations and keying material required for
   DNSSEC, so there is no provision made in this architecture for
   transferring private DNSSEC related keying material between the HNA
   and the DM.

   Once the Public Homenet Zone has been built, the HNA communicates and
   synchronizes it with the DOI using a primary/secondary setting as
   depicted in Figure 2.  The HNA acts as a stealth server (see
   [RFC8499]) while the DM behaves as a hidden secondary.  It is
   responsible for distributing the Public Homenet Zone to the multiple
   Public Authoritative Servers instances that DOI is responsible for.
   The DM has three communication channels:

   *  DM Control Channel (Section 6) to configure the HNA and the DOI.
      This includes necessary parameters to configure the primary/
      secondary relation as well as some information provided by the DOI
      that needs to be included by the HNA in the Public Homenet Zone.

   *  DM Synchronization Channel (Section 7) to synchronize the Public
      Homenet Zone on the HNA and on the DM with the appropriately
      configured primary/secondary.  This is a zone transfer over
      mutually authenticated TLS.

   *  one or more Distribution Channels (Section 8) that distribute the
      Public Homenet Zone from the DM to the Public Authoritative
      Servers serving the Public Homenet Zone on the Internet.






Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   There might be multiple DM's, and multiple servers per DM.  This
   document assumes a single DM server for simplicity, but there is no
   reason why each channel needs to be implemented on the same server or
   use the same code base.

   It is important to note that while the HNA is configured as an
   authoritative server, it is not expected to answer DNS requests from
   the _public_ Internet for the Public Homenet Zone.  More
   specifically, the addresses associated with the HNA SHOULD NOT be
   mentioned in the NS records of the Public Homenet zone, unless
   additional security provisions necessary to protect the HNA from
   external attack have been taken.

   The DOI is also responsible for ensuring the DS record has been
   updated in the parent zone.

   Resolution is performed by DNS(SEC) resolvers.  When the resolution
   is performed outside the home network, the DNS(SEC) Resolver resolves
   the DS record on the Global DNS and the name associated with the
   Public Homenet Zone (myhome.example) on the Public Authoritative
   Servers.

   In order to provide resilience to the Public Homenet Zone in case of
   WAN connectivity disruption, the Homenet DNS(SEC) Resolver MUST be
   able to perform the resolution on the Homenet Authoritative Servers.
   Note that the use of the Homenet resolver enhances privacy since the
   user on the home network would no longer be leaking interactions with
   internal services to an external DNS provider and to an on-path
   observer.  These servers are not expected to be mentioned in the
   Public Homenet Zone, nor to be accessible from the Internet.  As such
   their information as well as the corresponding signed DS record MAY
   be provided by the HNA to the Homenet DNS(SEC) Resolvers, e.g., using
   HNCP [RFC7788] or a by configuring a trust anchor
   [I-D.ietf-dnsop-dnssec-validator-requirements].  Such configuration
   is outside the scope of this document.  Since the scope of the
   Homenet Authoritative Servers is limited to the home network, these
   servers are expected to serve the Homenet Zone as represented in
   Figure 2.

5.2.  Distribution Manager (DM) Communication Channels

   This section details the DM channels, that is the Control Channel,
   the Synchronization Channel and the Distribution Channel.








Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   The Control Channel and the Synchronization Channel are the
   interfaces used between the HNA and the DOI.  The entity within the
   DOI responsible to handle these communications is the DM.
   Communications between the HNA and the DM MUST be protected and
   mutually authenticated.  Section 6.6 discusses in more depth the
   different security protocols that could be used to secure.

   The information exchanged between the HNA and the DM uses DNS
   messages protected by DNS over TLS (DoT) [RFC7858].  This is
   configured identically to that described in [RFC9103], Section 9.3.3.

   It is worth noting that both DM and HNA need to agree on a common
   configuration to set up the synchronization channel as well as to
   build and server a coherent Public Homenet Zone.  As previously
   noted, the visible NS records of the Public Homenet Zone (built by
   the HNA) remain pointing at the DOI's Public Authoritative Servers'
   IP address.  Unless the HNA is able to support the traffic load, the
   HNA SHOULD NOT appear as a visible NS records of the Public Homenet
   Zone.  In addition, and depending on the configuration of the DOI,
   the DM also needs to update the parent zone's NS, DS and associated A
   or AAAA glue records.  Refer to Section 6.2 for more details.

   This specification assumes:

   *  the DM serves both the Control Channel and Synchronization Channel
      on a single IP address, single port and using a single transport
      protocol.

   *  By default, the HNA uses a single IP address for both the Control
      and Synchronization channel.  However, the HNA MAY use distinct IP
      addresses for the Control Channel and the Synchronization Channel
      - see Section 7 and Section 6.3 for more details.

   The Distribution Channel is internal to the DOI and as such is not
   normatively defined by this specification.

6.  Control Channel

   The DM Control Channel is used by the HNA and the DOI to exchange
   information related to the configuration of the delegation which
   includes information to build the Public Homenet Zone (Section 6.1),
   information to build the DNSSEC chain of trust (Section 6.2) and
   information to set the Synchronization Channel (Section 6.3).








Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   Some information is carried from the DOI to the HNA, described in the
   next section.  The HNA updates the DOI with the the IP address on
   which the zone is to be transferred using the synchronization
   channel.  The HNA is always initiating the exchange in both
   directions.

   As such the HNA has a prior knowledge of the DM identity (via X509
   certificate), the IP address and port number to use and protocol to
   establish a secure session.  The DM acquires knowledge of the
   identity of the HNA (X509 certificate) as well as the Registered
   Homenet Domain.  For more detail to see how this can be achieved,
   please see Appendix A.1.

6.1.  Information to Build the Public Homenet Zone

   The HNA builds the Public Homenet Zone based on a template that is
   returned by the DM to the HNA.  Section 6.5 explains how this
   leverages the AXFR mechanism.

   In order to build its zone completely, the HNA needs the names (and
   possibly IP addresses) of the Public Authoritative Name Servers.
   These are used to populate the NS records for the zone.  All the
   content of the zone MUST be created by the HNA, because the zone is
   DNSSEC signed.

   In addition, the HNA needs to know what to put into the MNAME of the
   SOA, and only the DOI knows what to put there.  The DM MUST also
   provide useful operational parameters such as other fields of SOA
   (SERIAL, RNAME, REFRESH, RETRY, EXPIRE and MINIMUM), however, the HNA
   is free to override these values based upon local configuration.  For
   instance, an HNA might want to change these values if it thinks that
   a renumbering event is approaching.

   As the information is necessary for the HNA to proceed and the
   information is associated with the DM, this information exchange is
   mandatory.

   The HNA then performs a DNS Update operation to the DOI, updating the
   DOI with an NS, DS, A and AAAA records.  These indicates where its
   Synchronization Channel is.  The DOI does not publish this NS record,
   but uses it to perform zone transfers.










Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


6.2.  Information to build the DNSSEC chain of trust

   The HNA MUST provide the hash of the KSK via the DS RRset, so that
   the DOI can provide this value to the parent zone.  A common
   deployment use case is that the DOI is the registrar of the
   Registered Homenet Domain and as such, its relationship with the
   registry of the parent zone enables it to update the parent zone.
   When such relation exists, the HNA should be able to request the DOI
   to update the DS RRset in the parent zone.  A direct update is
   especially necessary to initialize the chain of trust.

   Though the HNA may also later directly update the values of the DS
   via the Control Channel, it is RECOMMENDED to use other mechanisms
   such as CDS and CDNSKEY [RFC7344] for transparent updates during key
   roll overs.

   As some deployments may not provide a DOI that will be able to update
   the DS in the parent zone, this information exchange is OPTIONAL.

   By accepting the DS RR, the DM commits to advertise the DS to the
   parent zone.  On the other hand if the DM does not have the capacity
   to advertise the DS to the parent zone, it indicates this by refusing
   the update to the DS RR.

6.3.  Information to set up the Synchronization Channel

   The HNA works as a hidden primary authoritative DNS server, while the
   DM works like a secondary.  As a result, the HNA needs to provide the
   IP address the DM should use to reach the HNA.

   If the HNA detects that it has been renumbered, then it MUST use the
   Control Channel to update the DOI with the new IPv6 address it has
   been assigned.

   The Synchronization Channel will be set between the new IPv6 (and
   IPv4) address and the IP address of the DM.  By default, the IP
   address used by the HNA in the Control Channel is considered by the
   DM and the explicit specification of the IP by the HNA is only
   OPTIONAL.  The transport channel (including port number) is the same
   as the one used between the HNA and the DM for the Control Channel.

6.4.  Deleting the delegation

   The purpose of the previous sections were to exchange information in
   order to set a delegation.  The HNA MUST also be able to delete a
   delegation with a specific DM.





Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   Section 6.5.4 explains how a DNS Update operation on the Control
   Channel is used.

   Upon an instruction of deleting the delegation, the DM MUST stop
   serving the Public Homenet Zone.

   The decision to delete an inactive HNA by the DM is part of the
   commercial agreement between DOI and HNA.

6.5.  Messages Exchange Description

   Multiple ways were considered on how the control information could be
   exchanged between the HNA and the DM.

   This specification defines a mechanism that re-uses the DNS zone
   transfer format.  Note that while information is provided using DNS
   exchanges, the exchanged information is not expected to be set in any
   zone file, instead this information is used as commands between the
   HNA and the DM.  This was found to be simpler on the home router
   side, as the HNA already has to have code to deal with all the DNS
   encodings/decodings.  Inventing a new way to encode the DNS
   information in, for instance, JSON, seemed to add complexity for no
   return on investment.

   The Control Channel is not expected to be a long-term session.  After
   a predefined timer - similar to those used for TCP - the Control
   Channel is expected to be terminated - by closing the transport
   channel.  The Control Channel MAY be re-opened at any time later.

   The use of a TLS session tickets [RFC8446], Section 4.6.1 is
   RECOMMENDED.

   The authentication of the channel MUST be based on certificates for
   both the DM and each HNA.  The DM may also create the initial
   configuration for the delegation zone in the parent zone during the
   provisioning process.

6.5.1.  Retrieving information for the Public Homenet Zone

   The information provided by the DM to the HNA is retrieved by the HNA
   with an AXFR exchange [RFC1034].  AXFR enables the response to
   contain any type of RRsets.

   To retrieve the necessary information to build the Public Homenet
   Zone, the HNA MUST send a DNS request of type AXFR associated with
   the Registered Homenet Domain.





Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   The zone that is returned by the DM is used by the HNA as a template
   to build its own zone.

   The zone template MUST contain a RRset of type SOA, one or multiple
   RRset of type NS and zero or more RRset of type A or AAAA (if the NS
   are in-domain [RFC8499]).  The zone template will include Time To
   Live (TTL) values for each RR, and the HNA SHOULD take these as
   suggested maximum values, but MAY use lower values for operational
   reasons, such impending renumbering events.

   *  The SOA RR indicates to the HNA the value of the MNAME of the
      Public Homenet Zone.

   *  The NAME of the SOA RR MUST be the Registered Homenet Domain.

   *  The MNAME value of the SOA RDATA is the value provided by the DOI
      to the HNA.

   *  Other RDATA values (RNAME, REFRESH, RETRY, EXPIRE and MINIMUM) are
      provided by the DOI as suggestions.

   The NS RRsets carry the Public Authoritative Servers of the DOI.
   Their associated NAME MUST be the Registered Homenet Domain.

   In addition to the considerations above about default TTL, the HNA
   SHOULD take care to not pick a TTL larger than the parent NS, based
   upon resolver's guide lines: [I-D.ietf-dnsop-ns-revalidation] and
   [I-D.ietf-dnsop-dnssec-validator-requirements].  The RRsets of Type A
   and AAAA MUST have their NAME matching the NSDNAME of one of the NS
   RRsets.

   Upon receiving the response, the HNA MUST validate format and
   properties of the SOA, NS and A or AAAA RRsets.  If an error occurs,
   the HNA MUST stop proceeding and MUST log an error.  Otherwise, the
   HNA builds the Public Homenet Zone by setting the MNAME value of the
   SOA as indicated by the SOA provided by the AXFR response.  The HNA
   MUST not exceed the values of NAME, REFRESH, RETRY, EXPIRE and
   MINIMUM of the SOA to those provided by the AXFR response.  The HNA
   MUST insert the NS and corresponding A or AAAA RRset in its Public
   Homenet Zone.  The HNA MUST ignore other RRsets.

   If an error message is returned by the DM, the HNA MUST proceed as a
   regular DNS resolution.  Error messages SHOULD be logged for further
   analysis.  If the resolution does not succeed, the outsourcing
   operation is aborted and the HNA MUST close the Control Channel.






Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


6.5.2.  Providing information for the DNSSEC chain of trust

   To provide the DS RRset to initialize the DNSSEC chain of trust the
   HNA MAY send a DNS update [RFC3007] message.

   The DNS update message is composed of a Header section, a Zone
   section, a Pre-requisite section, and Update section and an
   additional section.  The Zone section MUST set the ZNAME to the
   parent zone of the Registered Homenet Domain - that is where the DS
   records should be inserted.  As described [RFC2136], ZTYPE is set to
   SOA and ZCLASS is set to the zone's class.  The Pre-requisite section
   MUST be empty.  The Update section is a DS RRset with its NAME set to
   the Registered Homenet Domain and the associated RDATA corresponds to
   the value of the DS.  The Additional Data section MUST be empty.

   Though the pre-requisite section MAY be ignored by the DM, this value
   is fixed to remain coherent with a standard DNS update.

   Upon receiving the DNS update request, the DM reads the DS RRset in
   the Update section.  The DM checks ZNAME corresponds to the parent
   zone.  The DM MUST ignore the Pre-requisite and Additional Data
   sections, if present.  The DM MAY update the TTL value before
   updating the DS RRset in the parent zone.  Upon a successful update,
   the DM should return a NOERROR response as a commitment to update the
   parent zone with the provided DS.  An error indicates the DM does not
   update the DS, and the HNA needs to act accordingly or other method
   should be used by the HNA.

   The regular DNS error message MUST be returned to the HNA when an
   error occurs.  In particular a FORMERR is returned when a format
   error is found, this includes when unexpected RRSets are added or
   when RRsets are missing.  A SERVFAIL error is returned when a
   internal error is encountered.  A NOTZONE error is returned when
   update and Zone sections are not coherent, a NOTAUTH error is
   returned when the DM is not authoritative for the Zone section.  A
   REFUSED error is returned when the DM refuses to proceed to the
   configuration and the requested action.

6.5.3.  Providing information for the Synchronization Channel

   The default IP address used by the HNA for the Synchronization
   Channel is the IP address of the Control Channel.  To provide a
   different IP address, the HNA MAY send a DNS UPDATE message.

   Similarly to the Section 6.5.2, the HNA MAY specify the IP address
   using a DNS update message.  The Zone section sets its ZNAME to the
   parent zone of the Registered Homenet Domain, ZTYPE is set to SOA and
   ZCLASS is set to the zone's type.  Pre-requisite is empty.  The



Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   Update section is a RRset of type NS.  The Additional Data section
   contains the RRsets of type A or AAAA that designates the IP
   addresses associated with the primary (or the HNA).

   The reason to provide these IP addresses is to keep them unpublished
   and prevent them to be resolved.  It is RECOMMENDED the IP address of
   the HNA is randomly chosen to prevent it from being easily discovered
   as well.

   Upon receiving the DNS update request, the DM reads the IP addresses
   and checks the ZNAME corresponds to the parent zone.  The DM MUST
   ignore a non-empty Pre-requisite section.  The DM configures the
   secondary with the IP addresses and returns a NOERROR response to
   indicate it is committed to serve as a secondary.

   Similarly to Section 6.5.2, DNS errors are used and an error
   indicates the DM is not configured as a secondary.

6.5.4.  HNA instructing deleting the delegation

   To instruct to delete the delegation the HNA sends a DNS UPDATE
   Delete message.

   The Zone section sets its ZNAME to the Registered Homenet Domain, the
   ZTYPE to SOA and the ZCLASS to zone's type.  The Pre-requisite
   section is empty.  The Update section is a RRset of type NS with the
   NAME set to the Registered Domain Name.  As indicated by [RFC2136]
   Section 2.5.2 the delete instruction is set by setting the TTL to 0,
   the Class to ANY, the RDLENGTH to 0 and the RDATA MUST be empty.  The
   Additional Data section is empty.

   Upon receiving the DNS update request, the DM checks the request and
   removes the delegation.  The DM returns a NOERROR response to
   indicate the delegation has been deleted.  Similarly to
   Section 6.5.2, DNS errors are used and an error indicates the
   delegation has not been deleted.

6.6.  Securing the Control Channel

   TLS [RFC8446]) MUST be used to secure the transactions between the DM
   and the HNA and the DM and HNA MUST be mutually authenticated.  The
   DNS exchanges are performed using DNS over TLS [RFC7858].









Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 19]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   The HNA may be provisioned by the manufacturer, or during some user-
   initiated onboarding process, for example, with a browser, signing up
   to a service provider, with a resulting OAUTH2 token to be provided
   to the HNA.  Such a process may result in a passing of a settings
   from a Registrar into the HNA through an http API interface.  (This
   is not in scope)

   When the HNA connects to the DM's control channel, TLS will be used,
   and the connection will be mutually authenticated.  The DM will
   authenticate the HNA's certificate based upon having participating in
   some provisioning process that is not standardized by this document.
   The results of the provisioning process is a series of settings
   described in Appendix A.1.

   The HNA will validate the DM's control channel certificate by doing
   an [I-D.ietf-uta-rfc6125bis] DNS-ID check on the name.

   In the future, other specifications may consider protecting DNS
   messages with other transport layers, among others, DNS over DTLS
   [RFC8094], or DNS over HTTPs (DoH) [RFC8484] or DNS over QUIC
   [RFC9250].

7.  Synchronization Channel

   The DM Synchronization Channel is used for communication between the
   HNA and the DM for synchronizing the Public Homenet Zone.  Note that
   the Control Channel and the Synchronization Channel are by
   construction different channels even though there they may use the
   same IP address.  Suppose the HNA and the DM are using a single IP
   address and let designate by XX.  YYYYY and ZZZZZ the various ports
   involved in the communications.

   The Control Channel is between the HNA working as a client using port
   number YYYYY (an ephemeral also commonly designated as high range
   port) toward a service provided by the DM at port 853, when using
   DoT.

   On the other hand, the Synchronization Channel is set between the DM
   working as a client using port ZZZZZ (another ephemeral port) toward
   a service provided by the HNA at port 853.

   As a result, even though the same pair of IP addresses may be
   involved the Control Channel and the Synchronization Channel are
   always distinct channels.







Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 20]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   Uploading and dynamically updating the zone file on the DM can be
   seen as zone provisioning between the HNA (Hidden Primary) and the DM
   (Secondary Server).  This is handled using the normal zone transfer
   mechanism involving AXFR/IXFR.

   Part of this zone update process involves the owner of the zone (the
   hidden primary, the HNA) sending a DNS Notify to the secondaries.  In
   this situation the only destination that is known by the HNA is the
   DM's Control Channel, and so DNS notifies are sent over the Control
   Channel, secured by a mutually authenticated TLS.

   Please note that, DNS Notifies are not critical to normal operation,
   as the DM will be checking the zone regularly based upon SOA record
   comments.  DNS Notifies do speed things up as they cause the DM to
   use the Synchronization channel to immediately do an SOA Query to
   detect any updates.  If there are any changes then the DM immediately
   transfers the zone updates.

   This specification standardizes the use of a primary / secondary
   mechanism [RFC1996] rather than an extended series of DNS update
   messages.  The primary / secondary mechanism was selected as it
   scales better and avoids DoS attacks.  As this AXFR runs over a TCP
   channel secured by a mutually authenticated TLS, then DNS Update is
   just more complicated.

   Note that this document provides no standard way to distribute a DNS
   primary between multiple devices.  As a result, if multiple devices
   are candidate for hosting the Hidden Primary, some specific
   mechanisms should be designed so the home network only selects a
   single HNA for the Hidden Primary.  Selection mechanisms based on
   HNCP [RFC7788] are good candidates for future work.

7.1.  Securing the Synchronization Channel

   The Synchronization Channel uses mutually authenticated TLS, as
   described by [RFC9103].

   There is a TLS client certificate used by the DM to authenticate
   itself.  The DM uses the same certificate which was configured into
   the HNA for authenticating the Control Channel, but as a client
   certificate rather than a server certificate.

   [RFC9103] makes no requirements or recommendations on any extended
   key usage flags for zone transfers, and this document adopts the view
   that none should be required.  and leave it up to [RFC9103] to get
   updated for this document's normative reference to be considered
   updated as well.




Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 21]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   For the TLS server certificate, the HNA uses the same certificate
   which it uses to authenticate itself to the DM for the Control
   Channel.

   The HNA MAY use this certificate as the authorization for the zone
   transfer, or the HNA MAY have been configured with an Access Control
   List that will determine if the zone transfer can proceed.  This is a
   local configuration option, as it is premature to determine which
   will be operationally simpler.

   When the HNA expects to do zone transfer authorization by certificate
   only, the HNA MAY still apply an ACL on inbound connection requests
   to avoid load.  In this case, the HNA MUST regularly check (via a DNS
   resolution) that the address(es) of the DM in the filter is still
   valid.

8.  DM Distribution Channel

   The DM Distribution Channel is used for communication between the DM
   and the Public Authoritative Servers.  The architecture and
   communication used for the DM Distribution Channels are outside the
   scope of this document, and there are many existing solutions
   available, e.g., rsync, DNS AXFR, REST, DB copy.

9.  HNA Security Policies

   The HNA as hidden primary processes only a limited message exchanges
   on it's Internet facing interface.  This should be enforced using
   security policies - to allow only a subset of DNS requests to be
   received by HNA.

   The Hidden Primary Server on the HNA differs the regular
   authoritative server for the home network due to:

   Interface Binding:  the Hidden Primary Server will almost certainly
      listen on the WAN Interface, whereas a regular Homenet
      Authoritative Servers would listen on the internal home network
      interface.

   Limited exchanges:  the purpose of the Hidden Primary Server is to
      synchronize with the DM, not to serve any zones to end users, or
      the public Internet.  This results in a limited number of possible
      exchanges (AXFR/IXFR) with a small number of IP addresses and an
      implementation MUST enable filtering policies: it should only
      respond to queries that are required to do zone transfers.  That
      list includes SOA queries and AXFR/IXFR queries.





Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 22]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


10.  Public Homenet Reverse Zone

   Public Homenet Reverse Zone works similarly to the Public Homenet
   Zone.  The main difference is that ISP that provides the IPv6
   connectivity is likely also the owner of the corresponding IPv6
   reverse zone and administrating the Reverse Public Authoritative
   Servers.  The configuration and the setting of the Synchronization
   Channel and Control Channel can largely be automated using DHCPv6
   messages that are part of the IPv6 Prefix Delegation process.

   The Public Homenet Zone is associated with a Registered Homenet
   Domain and the ownership of that domain requires a specific
   registration from the end user as well as the HNA being provisioned
   with some authentication credentials.  Such steps are mandatory
   unless the DOI has some other means to authenticate the HNA.  Such
   situation may occur, for example, when the ISP provides the Homenet
   Domain as well as the DOI.

   In this case, the HNA may be authenticated by the physical link
   layer, in which case the authentication of the HNA may be performed
   without additional provisioning of the HNA.  While this may not be so
   common for the Public Homenet Zone, this situation is expected to be
   quite common for the Reverse Homenet Zone as the ISP owns the IP
   address or IP prefix.

   More specifically, a common case is that the upstream ISP provides
   the IPv6 prefix to the Homenet with a IA_PD [RFC8415] option and
   manages the DOI of the associated reverse zone.

   This leaves place for setting up automatically the relation between
   HNA and the DOI as described in
   [I-D.ietf-homenet-naming-architecture-dhc-options].

   In the case of the reverse zone, the DOI authenticates the source of
   the updates by IPv6 Access Control Lists.  In the case of the reverse
   zone, the ISP knows exactly what addresses have been delegated.  The
   HNA SHOULD therefore always originate Synchronization Channel updates
   from an IP address within the zone that is being updated.
   Exceptionally, the synchronization channel might be from a different
   zone delegated to the HNA (if there were multiple zones, or
   renumbering events were in progress).

   For example, if the ISP has assigned 2001:db8:f00d::/64 to the WAN
   interface (by DHCPv6, or PPP/RA), then the HNA should originate
   Synchronization Channel updates from, for example, 2001:db8:f00d::2.






Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 23]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   An ISP that has delegated 2001:db8:aeae::/56 to the HNA via
   DHCPv6-PD, then HNA should originate Synchronization Channel updates
   an IP within that subnet, such as 2001:db8:aeae:1::2.

   With this relation automatically configured, the synchronization
   between the Home network and the DOI happens similarly as for the
   Public Homenet Zone described earlier in this document.

   Note that for home networks connected to by multiple ISPs, each ISP
   provides only the DOI of the reverse zones associated with the
   delegated prefix.  It is also likely that the DNS exchanges will need
   to be performed on dedicated interfaces as to be accepted by the ISP.
   More specifically, the reverse zone associated with prefix 1 will not
   be possible to be performs by the HNA using an IP address that
   belongs to prefix 2.  Such constraints does not raise major concerns
   either for hot standby or load sharing configuration.

   With IPv6, the reverse domain space for IP addresses associated with
   a subnet such as ::/64 is so large that reverse zone may be
   confronted with scalability issues.  How the reverse zone is
   generated is out of scope of this document.  [RFC8501] provides
   guidance on how to address scalability issues.

11.  DNSSEC compliant Homenet Architecture

   [RFC7368] in Section 3.7.3 recommends DNSSEC to be deployed on both
   the authoritative server and the resolver.

   The resolver side is out of scope of this document, and only the
   authoritative part of the server is considered.  Other documents such
   as [RFC5011] deal with continuous update of trust anchors required
   for operation of a DNSSEC resolver.

   The HNA MUST DNSSEC sign the Public Homenet Zone and the Public
   Reverse Zone.

   Secure delegation is achieved only if the DS RRset is properly set in
   the parent zone.  Secure delegation can be performed by the HNA or
   the DOIs and the choice highly depends on which entity is authorized
   to perform such updates.  Typically, the DS RRset is updated manually
   through a registrar interface, and can be maintained with mechanisms
   such as CDS [RFC7344].

   When the operator of the DOI is also the Registrar for the domain,
   then it is a trivial matter for the DOI to initialize the relevant DS
   records in the parent zone.  In other cases, some other
   initialization will be required, and that will be specific to the
   infrastructure involved.  It is beyond the scope of this document.



Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 24]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   There may be some situations where the HNA is unable to arrange for
   secure delegation of the zones, but the HNA MUST still sign the
   zones.

12.  Renumbering

   During a renumbering of the home network, the HNA IP address may be
   changed and the Public Homenet Zone will be updated by the HNA with
   new AAAA records.

   The HNA will then advertise to the DM via a NOTIFY on the Control
   Channel.  The DM will need to note the new originating IP for the
   connection, and it will need to update it's internal database of
   Synchronization Channels.  A new zone transfer will occur with the
   new records for the resources that the HNA wishes to publish.

   The remaining of the section provides recommendations regarding the
   provisioning of the Public Homenet Zone - especially the IP
   addresses.

   Renumbering has been extensively described in [RFC4192] and analyzed
   in [RFC7010] and the reader is expected to be familiar with them
   before reading this section.  In the make-before-break renumbering
   scenario, the new prefix is advertised, the network is configured to
   prepare the transition to the new prefix.  During a period of time,
   the two prefixes old and new coexist, before the old prefix is
   completely removed.  New resources records containing the new prefix
   SHOULD be published, while the old resource records with the old
   prefixes SHOULD be withdrawn.  If the HNA anticipates that period of
   overlap is long (perhaps due to knowledge of router and DHCPv6
   lifetimes), it MAY publish the old prefixes with a significantly
   lower time to live.

   In break-before-make renumbering scenarios, including flash
   renumbering scenarios [RFC8978], the old prefix becomes unuseable
   before the new prefix is known or advertised.  As explained in
   [RFC8978], some flash renumberings occur due to power cycling of the
   HNA, where ISPs do not properly remember what prefixes have been
   assigned to which user.

   An HNA that boots up MUST immediately use the Control Channel to
   update the location for the Synchronization Channel.  This is a
   reasonable thing to do on every boot, as the HNA has no idea how long
   it has been offline, or if the (DNSSEC) zone has perhaps expired
   during the time the HNA was powered off.






Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 25]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   The HNA will have a list of names that should be published, but it
   might not yet have IP addresses for those devices.  This could be
   because at the time of power on, the other devices are not yet
   online.  If the HNA is sure that the prefix has not changed, then it
   should use the previously known addresses, with a very low TTL.

   Although the new and old IP addresses may be stored in the Public
   Homenet Zone, it is RECOMMENDED that only the newly reachable IP
   addresses be published.

   Regarding the Public Homenet Reverse Zone, the new Public Homenet
   Reverse Zone has to be populated as soon as possible, and the old
   Public Homenet Reverse Zone will be deleted by the owner of the zone
   (and the owner of the old prefix which is usually the ISP) once the
   prefix is no longer assigned to the HNA.  The ISP MUST ensure that
   the DNS cache has expired before re-assigning the prefix to a new
   home network.  This may be enforced by controlling the TTL values.

   To avoid reachability disruption, IP connectivity information
   provided by the DNS MUST be coherent with the IP in use.  In our
   case, this means the old IP address MUST NOT be provided via the DNS
   when it is not reachable anymore.

   In the make-before-break scenario, it is possible to make the
   transition seamless.  Let T be the TTL associated with a RRset of the
   Public Homenet Zone.  Let Time_NEW be the time the new IP address
   replaces the old IP address in the Homenet Zone, and
   Time_OLD_UNREACHABLE the time the old IP will not be reachable
   anymore.

   In the case of the make-before-break, seamless reachability is
   provided as long as Time_OLD_UNREACHABLE - T_NEW > (2 * T).  If this
   is not satisfied, then devices associated with the old IP address in
   the home network may become unreachable for 2 * T -
   (Time_OLD_UNREACHABLE - Time_NEW).

   In the case of a break-before-make, Time_OLD_UNREACHABLE = Time_NEW,
   and the device may become unreachable up to 2 * T.  Of course if
   Time_NEW >= Time_OLD_UNREACHABLE, then then outage is not seamless.

13.  Privacy Considerations

   Outsourcing the DNS Authoritative service from the HNA to a third
   party raises a few privacy related concerns.

   The Public Homenet Zone lists the names of services hosted in the
   home network.  Combined with blocking of AXFR queries, the use of
   NSEC3 [RFC5155] (vs NSEC [RFC4034]) prevents an attacker from being



Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 26]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   able to walk the zone, to discover all the names.  However, recent
   work [GPUNSEC3] or [ZONEENUM] have shown that the protection provided
   by NSEC3 against dictionary attacks should be considered cautiously
   and [RFC9276] provides guidelines to configure NSEC3 properly.  In
   addition, the attacker may be able to walk the reverse DNS zone, or
   use other reconnaissance techniques to learn this information as
   described in [RFC7707].

   The zone may be also exposed during the synchronization between the
   primary and the secondary.  The casual risk of this occuring is low,
   and the use of [RFC9103] significantly reduces this.  Even if
   [RFC9103] is used by the DNS Outsourcing Infrastructure, it may still
   leak the existence of the zone through Notifies.  The protocol
   described in this document does not increase that risk, as all
   Notifies use the encrypted Control Channel.

   In general a home network owner is expected to publish only names for
   which there is some need to be able to reference externally.
   Publication of the name does not imply that the service is
   necessarily reachable from any or all parts of the Internet.
   [RFC7084] mandates that the outgoing-only policy [RFC6092] be
   available, and in many cases it is configured by default.  A well
   designed User Interface would combine a policy for making a service
   public by a name with a policy on who may access it.

   In many cases, and for privacy reasons, the home network owner wished
   publish names only for services that they will be able to access.
   The access control may consist of an IP source address range, or
   access may be restricted via some VPN functionality.  The main
   advantages of publishing the name are that service may be access by
   the same name both within the home and outside the home and that the
   DNS resolution can be handled similarly within the home and outside
   the home.  This considerably eases the ability to use VPNs where the
   VPN can be chosen according to the IP address of the service.
   Typically, a user may configure its device to reach its homenet
   devices via a VPN while the remaining of the traffic is accessed
   directly.

   Enterprise networks have generally adopted another strategy
   designated as split-horizon-DNS.  While such strategy might appear as
   providing more privacy at first sight, its implementation remains
   challenging and the privacy advantages needs to be considered
   carefully.  In split-horizon-DNS, names are designated with internal
   names that can only be resolved within the corporate network.  When
   such strategy is applied to homenet, VPNs needs to be both configured
   with a naming resolution policies and routing policies.  Such
   approach might be reasonable with a single VPN, but maintaining a
   coherent DNS space and IP space among various VPNs comes with serious



Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 27]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   complexities.  Firstly, if multiple homenets are using the same
   domain name -- like home.arpa -- it becomes difficult to determine on
   which network the resolution should be performed.  As a result,
   homenets should at least be differentiated by a domain name.
   Secondly, the use of split-horizon-DNS requires each VPN being
   associated with a resolver and specific resolutions being performed
   by the dedicated resolver.  Such policies can easily raises some
   conflicts (with significant privacy issues) while remaining hard to
   be implemented.

   In addition to the Public Homenet Zone, pervasive DNS monitoring can
   also monitor the traffic associated with the Public Homenet Zone.
   This traffic may provide an indication of the services an end user
   accesses, plus how and when they use these services.  Although,
   caching may obfuscate this information inside the home network, it is
   likely that outside your home network this information will not be
   cached.

14.  Security Considerations

   The HNA never answers DNS requests from the Internet.  These requests
   are instead served by the DOI.

   While this limits the level of exposure of the HNA, the HNA still has
   some exposure to attacks from the Internet.  This section analyses
   the attack surface associated with these communications, the data
   published by the DOI, as well as operational considerations.

14.1.  Registered Homenet Domain

   The DOI MUST NOT serve any Public Homenet Zone that it has not strong
   confidence the HNA owns the Registered Homenet Domain.  Proof of
   ownership is outside the document and is assumed such phase has
   preceded the outsourcing of the zone.

14.2.  HNA DM channels

   The channels between HNA and DM are mutually authenticated and
   encrypted with TLS [RFC8446] and its associated security
   considerations apply.











Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 28]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   To ensure the multiple TLS session are continuously authenticating
   the same entity, TLS may take advantage of second factor
   authentication as described in [RFC8672] for the TLS server
   certificate for the Control Channel.  The HNA should also cache the
   TLS server certificate used by the DM, in order to authenticate the
   DM during the setup of the Synchronization Channel.  (Alternatively,
   the HNA is configured with an ACL from which Synchronization Channel
   connections will originate)

   The Control Channel and the Synchronization Channel respectively
   follow [RFC7858] and [RFC9103] guidelines.

   The DNS protocol is subject to reflection attacks, however, these
   attacks are largely applicable when DNS is carried over UDP.  The
   interfaces between the HNA and DM are using TLS over TCP, which
   prevents such reflection attacks.  Note that Public Authoritative
   servers hosted by the DOI are subject to such attacks, but that is
   out of scope of our document.

   Note that in the case of the Reverse Homenet Zone, the data is less
   subject to attacks than in the Public Homenet Zone.  In addition, the
   DM and Reverse Distribution Manager (RDM) may be provided by the ISP
   - as described in [I-D.ietf-homenet-naming-architecture-dhc-options],
   in which case DM and RDM might be less exposed to attacks - as
   communications within a network.

14.3.  Names are less secure than IP addresses

   This document describes how an end user can make their services and
   devices from their home network reachable on the Internet by using
   names rather than IP addresses.  This exposes the home network to
   attackers, since names are expected to include less entropy than IP
   addresses.  IPv4 Addresses are 4 bytes long leading to 2**32
   possibilities.  With IPv6 addresses, the Interface Identifier is 64
   bits long leading to up to 2^64 possibilities for a given subnetwork.
   This is not to mention that the subnet prefix is also of 64 bits
   long, thus providing up to 2^64 possibilities.  On the other hand,
   names used either for the home network domain or for the devices
   present less entropy (livebox, router, printer, nicolas, jennifer,
   ...) and thus potentially exposes the devices to dictionary attacks.











Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 29]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


14.4.  Names are less volatile than IP addresses

   IP addresses may be used to locate a device, a host or a service.
   However, home networks are not expected to be assigned a time
   invariant prefix by ISPs.  In addition IPv6 enables temporary
   addresses that makes them even more volatile [RFC8981].  As a result,
   observing IP addresses only provides some ephemeral information about
   who is accessing the service.  On the other hand, names are not
   expected to be as volatile as IP addresses.  As a result, logging
   names over time may be more valuable than logging IP addresses,
   especially to profile an end user's characteristics.

   PTR provides a way to bind an IP address to a name.  In that sense,
   responding to PTR DNS queries may affect the end user's privacy.  For
   that reason PTR DNS queries and MAY instead be configured to return
   with NXDOMAIN.

14.5.  Deployment Considerations

   The HNA is expected to sign the DNSSEC zone and as such hold the
   private KSK/ZSK.

   There is no strong justification in this case to use a separate KSK
   and ZSK.  If an attacker can get access to one of them, it likely
   that they will access both of them.  If the HNA is run in a home
   router with a secure element (SE) or TPM, storing the private keys in
   the secure element would be a useful precaution.  The DNSSEC keys are
   generally needed on an hourly to weekly basis, but not more often.

   While there is some risk that the DNSSEC keys might be disclosed by
   malicious parties, the bigger risk is that they will simply be lost
   if the home router is factory reset, or just thrown out/replaced with
   a newer model.

   Generating new DNSSEC keys is relatively easy, they can be deployed
   using the Control Channel to the DM.  The key that is used to
   authenticate that connection is the critical key that needs
   protection, and should ideally be backed up to offline storage.
   (Such as a USB key)

14.6.  Operational Considerations

   HomeNet technologies makes it easier to expose devices and services
   to the Internet.  This imposes broader operational considerations for
   the operator and the Internet:






Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 30]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   *  The home network operator must carefully assess whether a device
      or service previously fielded only on a home network is robust
      enough to be exposed to the Internet

   *  The home network operator will need to increase the diligence to
      regularly managing these exposed devices due to their increased
      risk posture of being exposed to the Internet

   *  Depending on the operational practices of the home network
      operators, there is an increased risk to the Internet through the
      possible introduction of additional internet-exposed system that
      are poorly managed and likely to be compromised.

15.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.

16.  Acknowledgment

   The authors wish to thank Philippe Lemordant for his contributions on
   the early versions of the draft; Ole Troan for pointing out issues
   with the IPv6 routed home concept and placing the scope of this
   document in a wider picture; Mark Townsley for encouragement and
   injecting a healthy debate on the merits of the idea; Ulrik de Bie
   for providing alternative solutions; Paul Mockapetris, Christian
   Jacquenet, Francis Dupont and Ludovic Eschard for their remarks on
   HNA and low power devices; Olafur Gudmundsson for clarifying DNSSEC
   capabilities of small devices; Simon Kelley for its feedback as
   dnsmasq implementer; Andrew Sullivan, Mark Andrew, Ted Lemon, Mikael
   Abrahamson, and Ray Bellis for their feedback on handling different
   views as well as clarifying the impact of outsourcing the zone
   signing operation outside the HNA; Mark Andrew and Peter Koch for
   clarifying the renumbering.

   At last the authors would like to thank Kiran Makhijani for her in-
   depth review that contributed in shaping the final version.

17.  Contributors

   The co-authors would like to thank Chris Griffiths and Wouter
   Cloetens that provided a significant contribution in the early
   versions of the document.

18.  References

18.1.  Normative References





Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 31]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   [I-D.ietf-uta-rfc6125bis]
              Saint-Andre, P. and R. Salz, "Service Identity in TLS",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-uta-
              rfc6125bis-08, 12 October 2022,
              <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-uta-
              rfc6125bis-08.txt>.

   [RFC1034]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and facilities",
              STD 13, RFC 1034, DOI 10.17487/RFC1034, November 1987,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1034>.

   [RFC1918]  Rekhter, Y., Moskowitz, B., Karrenberg, D., de Groot, G.
              J., and E. Lear, "Address Allocation for Private
              Internets", BCP 5, RFC 1918, DOI 10.17487/RFC1918,
              February 1996, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1918>.

   [RFC1996]  Vixie, P., "A Mechanism for Prompt Notification of Zone
              Changes (DNS NOTIFY)", RFC 1996, DOI 10.17487/RFC1996,
              August 1996, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1996>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC3007]  Wellington, B., "Secure Domain Name System (DNS) Dynamic
              Update", RFC 3007, DOI 10.17487/RFC3007, November 2000,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3007>.

   [RFC4034]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "Resource Records for the DNS Security Extensions",
              RFC 4034, DOI 10.17487/RFC4034, March 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4034>.

   [RFC5155]  Laurie, B., Sisson, G., Arends, R., and D. Blacka, "DNS
              Security (DNSSEC) Hashed Authenticated Denial of
              Existence", RFC 5155, DOI 10.17487/RFC5155, March 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5155>.

   [RFC7344]  Kumari, W., Gudmundsson, O., and G. Barwood, "Automating
              DNSSEC Delegation Trust Maintenance", RFC 7344,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7344, September 2014,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7344>.

   [RFC7858]  Hu, Z., Zhu, L., Heidemann, J., Mankin, A., Wessels, D.,
              and P. Hoffman, "Specification for DNS over Transport
              Layer Security (TLS)", RFC 7858, DOI 10.17487/RFC7858, May
              2016, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7858>.



Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 32]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8375]  Pfister, P. and T. Lemon, "Special-Use Domain
              'home.arpa.'", RFC 8375, DOI 10.17487/RFC8375, May 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8375>.

   [RFC8446]  Rescorla, E., "The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol
              Version 1.3", RFC 8446, DOI 10.17487/RFC8446, August 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8446>.

   [RFC8499]  Hoffman, P., Sullivan, A., and K. Fujiwara, "DNS
              Terminology", BCP 219, RFC 8499, DOI 10.17487/RFC8499,
              January 2019, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8499>.

   [RFC9103]  Toorop, W., Dickinson, S., Sahib, S., Aras, P., and A.
              Mankin, "DNS Zone Transfer over TLS", RFC 9103,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9103, August 2021,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9103>.

18.2.  Informative References

   [GPUNSEC3] Wander, M., Schwittmann, L., Boelmann, C., and T. Weis,
              "GPU-Based NSEC3 Hash Breaking", n.d.,
              <https://doi.org/10.1109/NCA.2014.27>.

   [I-D.ietf-dnsop-dnssec-validator-requirements]
              Migault, D. and D. York, "Recommendations for DNSSEC
              Resolvers Operators", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-ietf-dnsop-dnssec-validator-requirements-01, 13 May
              2022, <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-dnsop-
              dnssec-validator-requirements-01.txt>.

   [I-D.ietf-dnsop-domain-verification-techniques]
              Sahib, S. K., Huque, S., and P. Wouters, "Survey of Domain
              Verification Techniques using DNS", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-dnsop-domain-verification-
              techniques-00, 28 July 2022,
              <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-dnsop-domain-
              verification-techniques-00.txt>.

   [I-D.ietf-dnsop-ns-revalidation]
              Huque, S., Vixie, P. A., and R. Dolmans, "Delegation
              Revalidation by DNS Resolvers", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-dnsop-ns-revalidation-03, 6
              September 2022, <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-
              ietf-dnsop-ns-revalidation-03.txt>.



Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 33]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   [I-D.ietf-homenet-naming-architecture-dhc-options]
              Migault, D., Weber, R., and T. Mrugalski, "DHCPv6 Options
              for Home Network Naming Authority", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-homenet-naming-architecture-
              dhc-options-24, 31 October 2022,
              <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-homenet-
              naming-architecture-dhc-options-24.txt>.

   [I-D.richardson-homerouter-provisioning]
              Richardson, M., "Provisioning Initial Device Identifiers
              into Home Routers", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-richardson-homerouter-provisioning-02, 14 November
              2021, <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-richardson-
              homerouter-provisioning-02.txt>.

   [REBIND]   "DNS rebinding", n.d.,
              <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DNS_rebinding>.

   [RFC2136]  Vixie, P., Ed., Thomson, S., Rekhter, Y., and J. Bound,
              "Dynamic Updates in the Domain Name System (DNS UPDATE)",
              RFC 2136, DOI 10.17487/RFC2136, April 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2136>.

   [RFC3787]  Parker, J., Ed., "Recommendations for Interoperable IP
              Networks using Intermediate System to Intermediate System
              (IS-IS)", RFC 3787, DOI 10.17487/RFC3787, May 2004,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3787>.

   [RFC3927]  Cheshire, S., Aboba, B., and E. Guttman, "Dynamic
              Configuration of IPv4 Link-Local Addresses", RFC 3927,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3927, May 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3927>.

   [RFC4192]  Baker, F., Lear, E., and R. Droms, "Procedures for
              Renumbering an IPv6 Network without a Flag Day", RFC 4192,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4192, September 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4192>.

   [RFC4193]  Hinden, R. and B. Haberman, "Unique Local IPv6 Unicast
              Addresses", RFC 4193, DOI 10.17487/RFC4193, October 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4193>.

   [RFC4291]  Hinden, R. and S. Deering, "IP Version 6 Addressing
              Architecture", RFC 4291, DOI 10.17487/RFC4291, February
              2006, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4291>.






Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 34]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   [RFC5011]  StJohns, M., "Automated Updates of DNS Security (DNSSEC)
              Trust Anchors", STD 74, RFC 5011, DOI 10.17487/RFC5011,
              September 2007, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5011>.

   [RFC6092]  Woodyatt, J., Ed., "Recommended Simple Security
              Capabilities in Customer Premises Equipment (CPE) for
              Providing Residential IPv6 Internet Service", RFC 6092,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6092, January 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6092>.

   [RFC6749]  Hardt, D., Ed., "The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework",
              RFC 6749, DOI 10.17487/RFC6749, October 2012,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6749>.

   [RFC6762]  Cheshire, S. and M. Krochmal, "Multicast DNS", RFC 6762,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6762, February 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6762>.

   [RFC6887]  Wing, D., Ed., Cheshire, S., Boucadair, M., Penno, R., and
              P. Selkirk, "Port Control Protocol (PCP)", RFC 6887,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6887, April 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6887>.

   [RFC7010]  Liu, B., Jiang, S., Carpenter, B., Venaas, S., and W.
              George, "IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis", RFC 7010,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7010, September 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7010>.

   [RFC7084]  Singh, H., Beebee, W., Donley, C., and B. Stark, "Basic
              Requirements for IPv6 Customer Edge Routers", RFC 7084,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7084, November 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7084>.

   [RFC7368]  Chown, T., Ed., Arkko, J., Brandt, A., Troan, O., and J.
              Weil, "IPv6 Home Networking Architecture Principles",
              RFC 7368, DOI 10.17487/RFC7368, October 2014,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7368>.

   [RFC7404]  Behringer, M. and E. Vyncke, "Using Only Link-Local
              Addressing inside an IPv6 Network", RFC 7404,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7404, November 2014,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7404>.

   [RFC7707]  Gont, F. and T. Chown, "Network Reconnaissance in IPv6
              Networks", RFC 7707, DOI 10.17487/RFC7707, March 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7707>.





Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 35]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   [RFC7788]  Stenberg, M., Barth, S., and P. Pfister, "Home Networking
              Control Protocol", RFC 7788, DOI 10.17487/RFC7788, April
              2016, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7788>.

   [RFC8094]  Reddy, T., Wing, D., and P. Patil, "DNS over Datagram
              Transport Layer Security (DTLS)", RFC 8094,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8094, February 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8094>.

   [RFC8415]  Mrugalski, T., Siodelski, M., Volz, B., Yourtchenko, A.,
              Richardson, M., Jiang, S., Lemon, T., and T. Winters,
              "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6 (DHCPv6)",
              RFC 8415, DOI 10.17487/RFC8415, November 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8415>.

   [RFC8484]  Hoffman, P. and P. McManus, "DNS Queries over HTTPS
              (DoH)", RFC 8484, DOI 10.17487/RFC8484, October 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8484>.

   [RFC8501]  Howard, L., "Reverse DNS in IPv6 for Internet Service
              Providers", RFC 8501, DOI 10.17487/RFC8501, November 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8501>.

   [RFC8555]  Barnes, R., Hoffman-Andrews, J., McCarney, D., and J.
              Kasten, "Automatic Certificate Management Environment
              (ACME)", RFC 8555, DOI 10.17487/RFC8555, March 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8555>.

   [RFC8610]  Birkholz, H., Vigano, C., and C. Bormann, "Concise Data
              Definition Language (CDDL): A Notational Convention to
              Express Concise Binary Object Representation (CBOR) and
              JSON Data Structures", RFC 8610, DOI 10.17487/RFC8610,
              June 2019, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8610>.

   [RFC8672]  Sheffer, Y. and D. Migault, "TLS Server Identity Pinning
              with Tickets", RFC 8672, DOI 10.17487/RFC8672, October
              2019, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8672>.

   [RFC8978]  Gont, F., or, J., and R. Patterson, "Reaction of IPv6
              Stateless Address Autoconfiguration (SLAAC) to Flash-
              Renumbering Events", RFC 8978, DOI 10.17487/RFC8978, March
              2021, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8978>.

   [RFC8981]  Gont, F., Krishnan, S., Narten, T., and R. Draves,
              "Temporary Address Extensions for Stateless Address
              Autoconfiguration in IPv6", RFC 8981,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8981, February 2021,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8981>.



Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 36]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   [RFC9250]  Huitema, C., Dickinson, S., and A. Mankin, "DNS over
              Dedicated QUIC Connections", RFC 9250,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9250, May 2022,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9250>.

   [RFC9276]  Hardaker, W. and V. Dukhovni, "Guidance for NSEC3
              Parameter Settings", BCP 236, RFC 9276,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9276, August 2022,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9276>.

   [ZONEENUM] Wang, Z., Xiao, L., and R. Wang, "An efficient DNSSEC zone
              enumeration algorithm", n.d..

Appendix A.  HNA Channel Configurations

A.1.  Homenet Public Zone

   This document does not deal with how the HNA is provisioned with a
   trusted relationship to the Distribution Manager for the forward
   zone.

   This section details what needs to be provisioned into the HNA and
   serves as a requirements statement for mechanisms.

   The HNA needs to be provisioned with:

   *  the Registered Domain (e.g., myhome.example )

   *  the contact info for the Distribution Manager (DM), including the
      DNS name (FQDN), possibly including the IP literal, and a
      certificate (or anchor) to be used to authenticate the service

   *  the DM transport protocol and port (the default is DNS over TLS,
      on port 853)

   *  the HNA credentials used by the DM for its authentication.

   The HNA will need to select an IP address for communication for the
   Synchronization Channel.  This is typically the WAN address of the
   CPE, but could be an IPv6 LAN address in the case of a home with
   multiple ISPs (and multiple border routers).  This is detailed in
   Section 6.5.3 when the NS and A or AAAA RRsets are communicated.









Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 37]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   The above parameters MUST be be provisioned for ISP-specific reverse
   zones.  One example of how to do this can be found in
   [I-D.ietf-homenet-naming-architecture-dhc-options].  ISP-specific
   forward zones MAY also be provisioned using
   [I-D.ietf-homenet-naming-architecture-dhc-options], but zones which
   are not related to a specific ISP zone (such as with a DNS provider)
   must be provisioned through other means.

   Similarly, if the HNA is provided by a registrar, the HNA may be
   handed pre-configured to end user.

   In the absence of specific pre-established relation, these pieces of
   information may be entered manually by the end user.  In order to
   ease the configuration from the end user the following scheme may be
   implemented.

   The HNA may present the end user a web interface where it provides
   the end user the ability to indicate the Registered Homenet Domain or
   the registrar for example a preselected list.  Once the registrar has
   been selected, the HNA redirects the end user to that registrar in
   order to receive a access token.  The access token will enable the
   HNA to retrieve the DM parameters associated with the Registered
   Domain.  These parameters will include the credentials used by the
   HNA to establish the Control and Synchronization Channels.

   Such architecture limits the necessary steps to configure the HNA
   from the end user.

Appendix B.  Information Model for Outsourced information

   This section specifies an optional format for the set of parameters
   required by the HNA to configure the naming architecture of this
   document.

   In cases where a home router has not been provisioned by the
   manufacturer (when forward zones are provided by the manufacturer),
   or by the ISP (when the ISP provides this service), then a home user/
   owner will need to configure these settings via an administrative
   interface.

   By defining a standard format (in JSON) for this configuration
   information, the user/owner may be able to just copy and paste a
   configuration blob from the service provider into the administrative
   interface of the HNA.

   This format may also provide the basis for a future OAUTH2 [RFC6749]
   flow that could do the setup automatically.




Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 38]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   The HNA needs to be configured with the following parameters as
   described by this CDDL [RFC8610].  These are the parameters are
   necessary to establish a secure channel between the HNA and the DM as
   well as to specify the DNS zone that is in the scope of the
   communication.

   hna-configuration = {
     "registered_domain" : tstr,
     "dm"                : tstr,
     ? "dm_transport" : "DoT"
     ? "dm_port"        : uint,
     ? "dm_acl"         : hna-acl / [ +hna-acl ]
     ? "hna_auth_method": hna-auth-method
     ? "hna_certificate": tstr
   }

   hna-acl          = tstr
   hna-auth-method  /= "certificate"

   For example:

 {
   "registered_domain" : "n8d234f.r.example.net",
   "dm"                : "2001:db8:1234:111:222::2",
   "dm_transport"      : "DoT",
   "dm_port"           : 4433,
   "dm_acl"            : "2001:db8:1f15:62e:21c::/64"
                    or [ "2001:db8:1f15:62e:21c::/64", ... ]
   "hna_auth_method"   : "certificate",
   "hna_certificate"   : "-----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----\nMIIDTjCCFGy....",
 }

   Registered Homenet Domain (registered_domain)  The Domain Name of the
      zone.  Multiple Registered Homenet Domains may be provided.  This
      will generate the creation of multiple Public Homenet Zones.  This
      parameter is mandatory.

   Distribution Manager notification address (dm)  The associated FQDNs
      or IP addresses of the DM to which DNS notifies should be sent.
      This parameter is mandatory.  IP addresses are optional and the
      FQDN is sufficient and preferred.  If there are concerns about the
      security of the name to IP translation, then DNSSEC should be
      employed.

   As the session between the HNA and the DM is authenticated with TLS,
   the use of names is easier.





Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 39]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   As certificates are more commonly emitted for FQDN than for IP
   addresses, it is preferred to use names and authenticate the name of
   the DM during the TLS session establishment.

   Supported Transport (dm_transport):  The transport that carries the
      DNS exchanges between the HNA and the DM.  Typical value is "DoT"
      but it may be extended in the future with "DoH", "DoQ" for
      example.  This parameter is optional and by default the HNA uses
      DoT.

   Distribution Manager Port (dm_port):  Indicates the port used by the
      DM.  This parameter is optional and the default value is provided
      by the Supported Transport.  In the future, additional transport
      may not have default port, in which case either a default port
      needs to be defined or this parameter become mandatory.

   Note that HNA does not defines ports for the Synchronization Channel.
   In any case, this is not expected to part of the configuration, but
   instead negotiated through the Configuration Channel.  Currently the
   Configuration Channel does not provide this, and limits its agility
   to a dedicated IP address.  If such agility is needed in the future,
   additional exchanges will need to be defined.

   Authentication Method ("hna_auth_method"):  How the HNA authenticates
      itself to the DM within the TLS connection(s).  The authentication
      method can typically be "certificate", "psk" or "none".  This
      Parameter is optional and by default the Authentication Method is
      "certificate".

   Authentication data ("hna_certificate", "hna_key"):  The certificate
      chain used to authenticate the HNA.  This parameter is optional
      and when not specified, a self-signed certificate is used.

   Distribution Manager AXFR permission netmask (dm_acl):  The subnet
      from which the CPE should accept SOA queries and AXFR requests.  A
      subnet is used in the case where the DOI consists of a number of
      different systems.  An array of addresses is permitted.  This
      parameter is optional and if unspecified, the CPE uses the IP
      addresses provided by the dm parameter either directly when dm
      indicates an IP address or the IP addresses returned by the
      DNS(SEC) resolution when dm indicates a FQDN.

   For forward zones, the relationship between the HNA and the forward
   zone provider may be the result of a number of transactions:

   1.  The forward zone outsourcing may be provided by the maker of the
       Homenet router.  In this case, the identity and authorization
       could be built in the device at manufacturer provisioning time.



Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 40]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


       The device would need to be provisioned with a device-unique
       credential, and it is likely that the Registered Homenet Domain
       would be derived from a public attribute of the device, such as a
       serial number (see Appendix C or
       [I-D.richardson-homerouter-provisioning] for more details ).

   2.  The forward zone outsourcing may be provided by the Internet
       Service Provider.  In this case, the use of
       [I-D.ietf-homenet-naming-architecture-dhc-options] to provide the
       credentials is appropriate.

   3.  The forward zone may be outsourced to a third party, such as a
       domain registrar.  In this case, the use of the JSON-serialized
       YANG data model described in this section is appropriate, as it
       can easily be copy and pasted by the user, or downloaded as part
       of a web transaction.

   For reverse zones, the relationship is always with the upstream ISP
   (although there may be more than one), and so
   [I-D.ietf-homenet-naming-architecture-dhc-options] is always the
   appropriate interface.

   The following is an abbridged example of a set of data that
   represents the needed configuration parameters for outsourcing.

Appendix C.  Example: A manufacturer provisioned HNA product flow

   This scenario is one where a homenet router device manufacturer
   decides to offer DNS hosting as a value add.

   [I-D.richardson-homerouter-provisioning] describes a process for a
   home router credential provisioning system.  The outline of it is
   that near the end of the manufacturing process, as part of the
   firmware loading, the manufacturer provisions a private key and
   certificate into the device.

   In addition to having a assymmetric credential known to the
   manufacturer, the device also has been provisioned with an agreed
   upon name.  In the example in the above document, the name
   "n8d234f.r.example.net" has already been allocated and confirmed with
   the manufacturer.

   The HNA can use the above domain for itself.  It is not very pretty
   or personal, but if the owner wishes a better name, they can arrange
   for it.

   The configuration would look like:




Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 41]

Internet-Draft                public-names                  January 2023


   {
     "dm" : "2001:db8:1234:111:222::2",
     "dm_acl"    : "2001:db8:1234:111:222::/64",
     "dm_ctrl"   : "manufacturer.example.net",
     "dm_port"   : "4433",
     "ns_list"   : [ "ns1.publicdns.example", "ns2.publicdns.example"],
     "zone"      : "n8d234f.r.example.net",
     "auth_method" : "certificate",
     "hna_certificate":"-----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----\nMIIDTjCCFGy....",
   }

   The dm_ctrl and dm_port values would be built into the firmware.

Authors' Addresses

   Daniel Migault
   Ericsson
   8275 Trans Canada Route
   Saint Laurent, QC  4S 0B6
   Canada
   Email: daniel.migault@ericsson.com


   Ralf Weber
   Nominum
   2000 Seaport Blvd
   Redwood City,  94063
   United States of America
   Email: ralf.weber@nominum.com


   Michael Richardson
   Sandelman Software Works
   470 Dawson Avenue
   Ottawa, ON  K1Z 5V7
   Canada
   Email: mcr+ietf@sandelman.ca


   Ray Hunter
   Globis Consulting BV
   Weegschaalstraat 3
   5632CW Eindhoven
   Netherlands
   Email: v6ops@globis.net






Migault, et al.           Expires 20 July 2023                 [Page 42]
